---
title: Update to Freenode Press Release Statement
date: 2021-06-12
summary: Fosshost will not persue partnership with Freenode
author: thomas
draft: true
---

# Update to Freenode Press Release Statement

Fosshost is a non-profit home and superstructure of FOSS projects. We
provide a range of services to support, promote, advance, and underpin
the global FOSS community, comprising 130,352 active open-source
projects.

In twelve months, we have grown significantly, offering our services
to more than 160 open-source projects, including x86 and AArch64
hosting, download mirrors, email/web and domain name hosting.

We currently have a PoP (point of presence) in more than seven
countries globally, and major sponsors include developer cloud service
provider DigitalOcean and ARM-chip maker Ampere Computing.

## The Vision

Our vision is to be a pillar for the open-source community, acting as
their trusted advisor, mentor and conservator, whilst ensuring FOSS
projects can develop their concept, project or idea on a rock solid
foundation.

To deliver world-class, no-cost, elastic FOSS hosting services in x86
and AArch64 architecture throughout the Fosshost Global CDN;

To provide guardian services to FOSS projects, including
administrative, financial, legal and custodianship, allowing projects
to focus on core development;

To provide financial support and grants to FOSS projects, to remove
the barriers associated with developing and maintaining free,
open-source software;

Champion and advocate FOSS by running networking events, creating
volunteering and employment prospects, mentoring, and project pairing
services to allow open-source developers to network and share
resources.

Towards the end of May this year, Fosshost began a process to create
an advisory Committee Board (ACB) that will report directly to our
Board of Directors.  The committee members invited thus far are
leaders in open-source excellence, recognised for eminence, authority
or seniority. These individuals are likely to have a substantial
record of published work and public speaking and have contributed to
advancing the knowledge and understanding of their chosen discipline.

We invite interested and well-qualified community members to apply to
participate in our ACB and help advise future difficult decisions,
such as those we write about here, today.

Recent Developments

On the 1st of June, 2021, we released a press statement called
Freenode Partnership. The blog post articulated a collaboration with
Freenode.  The partnership was the culmination of several verbal
discussions with Mr Andrew Lee, President of Freenode Limited.

Within the press release statement we briefly detailed the mechanics
of the collaboration, using our experience in providing FOSS hosting
services, and to further advise the current Freenode Management on how
to develop the thriving online community that Freenode has been for
the past 20 years.

When we announced the collaboration, many of you reached out to voice
your concerns. The main reason for your feedback was that many in the
community did not agree with Fosshost supporting Freenode.

As a UK-registered Community Interest Company (CIC), we are required
to complete appropriate due diligence and governance processes when
voting on significant organisational change.

As part of this process, and alongside the feedback from the
community, we have reviewed our decision about the Freenode
partnership. This process has taken some time to complete whilst we
engaged outside professional services to provide an independent review
and analysis of our actions.

On the 11th of June 2021, we formally asked all staff (volunteers who
are not directors) to participate in a vote to understand their
preference for the described partnership. The result was unanimous
that we should end the partnership.

During the volunteer vote process, we informally reached out to
Mr. Lee to inform him of the community feedback and position.

Mr Lee has been incredibly supportive of Fosshost.  He has personally
advised in writing on multiple occasions that these
donations/gestures/support as shown to Fosshost have been
philanthropic donations and clarifying they are not and were not the
basis for a partnership between freenode and Fosshost. Further, when
we reached out to share the consensus of our volunteers, prior to
sharing this note with you, Mr Lee expressed only understanding
well-wishes for our project, accepting that Fosshost must now
relinquish the pursuit of the Freenode partnership. While we act now
to align to the wishes of our volunteers and community members who ask
that we retain a strict focus on our central mission of providing
hosting and organizing support for projects, we do so candidly
acknowledging that Mr. Lee has shown good faith and firm support
toward our project throughout our conversations.

Freenode has applied to and been approved already for certain hosting
services (not currently including any networked IRC nodes).  Further,
freenode remains welcome to apply for more/additional services in the
future. Applications from Freenode, as from any project, must (and do)
meet our published eligibility criteria.  While some Fosshost staff
may remain as volunteer Freenode Staff to help advise the development
of the freenode IRC network, staff who volunteer with freenode do so
outside of (and unrelated to) their commitments to Fosshost.

## Concluding Remarks

We made mistakes as we started our dialogue with Mr. Lee, and these
mistakes resulted in some knee-jerk decisions.  In hindsight, we did
not carefully consider this decision in advance with input from our
volunteers and the community.  We will seek to remain good friends
with Freenode; we cannot stress enough how much the level of support
shown to our project will mean to our mission and our ability to
continue to work on that mission.

I am very grateful to all of those who have supported Fosshost during
these difficult times.  As we share this decision I and the rest of
the Fosshost board would like to be clear that we have taken your
feedback seriously.  I further add that I would like to personally
apologise; if we have damaged your ability to trust and entrust us
with your projects, know that we intend to demonstrate clarity
regarding the lessons learnt: we will become stronger by listening
more urgently to our volunteers and community and by staying
steadfastly focused on our core mission and vision.

You will see these lessons reflected across our actions going forward.
We are here to stay.

If you require any further clarification regarding this memo, please
contact me personally, and I will endeavour to respond to you as soon
as possible.

Yours sincerely,

Thomas Markey *Founder and Chief Executive Officer*

E: Thomas@fosshost.org

For and on behalf of Fosshost C.I.C

## Updated FAQs

### Was Fosshost ever sold or acquired, and who owns it?

Fosshost is Limited by Guarantee (without shares). Our assets are
locked.  If we wind-up all of our assets immediately become the title
of Oregon State University Foundation, as described in our articles of
association. Fosshost may reinvest profit only back into the
project/community.

### Have you spent any of the money so far?

No. We are, however, making plans to look at how we use donations to
become sustainable to protect our future for as long as possible.

### Has the Fosshost Team/Board Changed?

No, there have been no changes since we have started exploring a
partnership with Freenode.

### I am a corporate sponsor. How can I explore supporting Fosshost?

Please email [board@fosshost.org](mailto:board@fosshost.org)

### Are you giving the money back?

No; all monies received were purely on the basis of a donation.

### Have you obtained legal advice?

Yes, we received professional legal advice from a reputable,
London-based technology law firm.

### What will your relationship be with Freenode after this?

Freenode is a hosted project, treated like any other according to our
criteria. Our directors plan to continue as staff of Freenode
providing advice personally from our own skills and experience.

### We left Fosshost after hearing about the Freenode Partnership and
would like to return to using your service.

You are always welcome back, providing you continue to meet our
eligibility criteria and legal terms of service.

### I want to donate!

Thank you! Please visit [https://fosshost.org/donate](https://fosshost.org/donate)
to see how you can donate and other ways to contribute to our project.
